Add AnyLanguageModel article (#3174)
huggingface/blog: anylanguagemodel.md

Reviewer: You will also need to add this to here: https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/main/_blog.yml

I would suggest adding some extra authors, like @pcuenca .

The core idea is simple:
Swap your `import` statement, keep the same API.

```diff
- import FoundationModels
+ import AnyLanguageModel
```

Here's what that looks like in practice.
Start with Apple's built-in model:

```swift
let model = SystemLanguageModel.default
let session = LanguageModelSession(model: model)

let response = try await session.respond(to: "Explain quantum computing in one sentence")
print(response.content)
```

Now try an open-source model running locally via [MLX](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/mlx):

```swift
let model = MLXLanguageModel(modelId: "mlx-community/Qwen3-4B-4bit")
let session = LanguageModelSession(model: model)

let response = try await session.respond(to: "Explain quantum computing in one sentence")
print(response.content)
```

AnyLanguageModel supports a range of providers:

- **Apple Foundation Models**: Native integration with Apple's system model (macOS 26+ / iOS 26+)
- **Core ML**: Run converted models with Neural Engine acceleration
- **MLX**: Run quantized models efficiently on Apple Silicon
- **llama.cpp**: Load GGUF models via the llama.cpp backend
- **Ollama**: Connect to locally-served models via Ollama's HTTP API

> - **OpenAI, Anthropic, Google Gemini**: Cloud providers for comparison and fallback

Author: That's a good callout. 

Right now, the demo chat app is calling out to HF Inference Providers through its OpenAI-compatible API. We have all of the necessary code in [swift-huggingface](https://github.com/mattt/swift-huggingface/blob/main/Sources/HuggingFace/InferenceProviders/ChatCompletion.swift) to implement a proper adapter, but I'm not sure what that would offer beyond what we get from an OpenAI adapter.

So two thoughts:
- If we want to call out HF Inference Providers here, we could do a quick aside / parenthetical to be explicit that it supports compatible endpoints
- If we identify features of the native HF Inference Providers API that you can't get through the OpenAI-compatible API, then we could implement a new language model adapter and write a follow-up blog post (that could take the form of a tie-in when announcing swift-huggingface)

Any strong feelings one way or another?

> - **OpenAI, Anthropic, Google Gemini**: Cloud providers for comparison and fallback

Reviewer 2: Yes! But I also wanted to single out Inference Providers as a special item. Happy to go this way though.

The focus is on local models that you can download from the [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/).
Cloud providers are included to lower the barrier to getting started and to provide a migration path.
Make it work, then make it right.

## Why Foundation Models as the Base API

When designing AnyLanguageModel, we faced a choice:
create a new abstraction that tries to capture everything,
or build on an existing API.
We chose the latter,
using [Apple's Foundation Models framework](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/FoundationModels)
as the template.

This might seem counterintuitive.
Why tie ourselves to Apple's choices?
A few reasons:

> First, Foundation Models is genuinely well-designed.

Reviewer 2: I thought about that too, but I think the narrative flow works well in this case, rather than a bullet list that could have been put together by an LLM 😂

Do you think it's clearer with a list, Ben?

> First, Foundation Models is genuinely well-designed.

Reviewer: Yeah, maybe it's my slop brain (lol) but I just found the structure easier to follow.

> First, Foundation Models is genuinely well-designed.

Author: Sure, happy to break that text up with an ordered list.

It leverages Swift features like macros for an ergonomic developer experience,
and its abstractions around sessions, tools, and generation map well to how LLMs actually work.

Second, it's intentionally limited.
Foundation Models represents something like a lowest common denominator for language model capabilities.
Rather than seeing this as a weakness,
we treat it as a stable foundation (_hyuk hyuk_).
Every Swift developer targeting Apple platforms will encounter this API,
so building on it directly means less conceptual overhead.

Third, it keeps us grounded.
Each additional layer of abstraction takes you further from the problem you're actually solving.
Abstractions are powerful,

> but stack too many and they become a problem in themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but stack too many and they become a hindrance.
```

Author: I like the word hindrance, but I think reusing "problem" here reinforces the previous sentence.

The result is that switching between providers requires minimal code changes,
and the core abstractions remain clean and predictable.

## Package Traits: Include Only What You Need

One challenge with multi-backend libraries is dependency bloat.
If you only want to run MLX models,
you shouldn't have to pull in llama.cpp and all _its_ dependencies.

AnyLanguageModel uses Swift 6.1 package traits to solve this.
You opt in to only the backends you need:

```swift
dependencies: [
    .package(
        url: "https://github.com/mattt/AnyLanguageModel.git",
        from: "0.4.0",
        traits: ["MLX"]  // Pull in MLX dependencies only
    )
]
```

> Available traits include `CoreML`, `MLX`, and `Llama`.

Author: Good callout. It's specifically llama.cpp / [llama.swift](https://github.com/mattt/llama.swift).

)

let session = LanguageModelSession(model: model)
let response = try await session.respond(
    to: "What's in this image?",
    image: .init(url: URL(fileURLWithPath: "/path/to/image.png"))
)
```

We're taking a calculated risk here;
we might design something that conflicts with Apple's eventual implementation.
But that's what deprecation warnings are for.
Sometimes you have to write the API for the framework that doesn't exist yet.

## Try It Out: chat-ui-swift

To see AnyLanguageModel in action,
check out [chat-ui-swift](https://github.com/mattt/chat-ui-swift),
a SwiftUI chat application that demonstrates the library's capabilities.

The app includes:

- Apple Intelligence integration via Foundation Models (macOS 26+)
- Hugging Face OAuth authentication for accessing gated models
- Streaming responses
- Chat persistence

It's meant as a starting point:
Fork it, extend it, swap in different models.
See how the pieces fit together and adapt it to your needs.

## What's Next

AnyLanguageModel is currently pre-1.0.
The core API is stable,
but we're actively working on bringing the full feature set of Foundation Models to all adapters, namely:

> - **Tool calling** across all providers

Author: ```suggestion
- **Tool calling** across all providers
- **MCP integration** for tools and elicitations
```

---
title: "Introducing AnyLanguageModel: One API for Local and Remote LLMs on Apple Platforms"

> #thumbnail: TK

Reviewer 2: We need the thumbnail path here

Author: Added with ebdcecc

---
title: "Introducing AnyLanguageModel: One API for Local and Remote LLMs on Apple Platforms"
#thumbnail: TK
authors:
- user: mattt
  guest: true
---

> ![banner image](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/any-swift-llm/banner.png)

Author: Gotcha. Let's omit that for now.
